Add passkeys guide (#42338)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/security/authentication/passkeys/index.md

- Go through the two main flows supported by WebAuthn: [registration](#registration) and [sign-in](#sign_in).
- Explore some of the main [features of the WebAuthn API](#features_of_webauthn).
- Summarise the [security properties of passkeys](#security_properties_of_passkeys).
- Explore some good practices to help prevent users from being locked out if they [lose their passkeys](#handling_lost_passkeys), and to help users [migrate from passwords](#migrating_from_passwords).

## The WebAuthn API

To interact with an authenticator, a website uses the [Web Authentication API (WebAuthn)](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Authentication_API). In the WebAuthn specification, a website that uses passkeys to authenticate users is called a _Relying Party_ (RP), and we'll use that term in this guide.

WebAuthn is an extension of the [Credential Management API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Credential_Management_API), which is a framework for managing {{glossary("credential", "credentials")}} for various authentication methods, including [passwords](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Authentication/Passwords) and [federated identity](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Authentication/Federated_identity), as well as passkeys.

> The two main APIs are:

Reviewer: Maybe

```suggestion
The two main methods are:
```

Reviewer: Though what I'm really thinking is main "for who" -so maybe  "two main methods for RPs"

- {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}}, which you use to create a new passkey when a user registers on your site.
- {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.get()")}}, which you use to generate an assertion from the user's stored passkey, when the user signs into your site.

## Registration

In this section we'll walk through the flow used to create a new passkey and use it to set up a new user account.

![Overview of user registration with passkeys.](passkeys-register.svg)

When the user asks to register on a site, the RP's front-end code first asks its server for a [_challenge_](#challenges): this is a random value generated on the server, that the server will later use to ensure that the resulting passkey was generated in response to this request.

Next, the RP's front-end code calls {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}}. It can specify various options, including:

> - **Attestation preferences**: Whether the RP is interested in authenticator [attestation](#attestation), and if so, what form the attestation should take.

Reviewer: Having re-read this section again, this still grates. The reason being that we use attestation all over the place - the term is overloaded. In this place we mean something different from what we have done elsewhere.

Bare minimum fix for me would be to make that clear

```suggestion
- **Attestation preferences**: Whether the RP is interested in [authenticator attestation](#attestation), and if so, what form the attestation should take.
```

> - **Attestation preferences**: Whether the RP is interested in authenticator [attestation](#attestation), and if so, what form the attestation should take.

Reviewer: Or maybe better ...

```suggestion
- **Attestation preferences**: Whether the RP is interested in validating that the authenticator can be trusted and if so, what form the [authenticator attestation](#attestation), should take.
```

> - **Attestation preferences**: Whether the RP is interested in authenticator [attestation](#attestation), and if so, what form the attestation should take.

Author: > The reason being that we use attestation all over the place - the term is overloaded.

Where else in this guide do we talk about attestation in any other sense? I can't really think of anywhere in MDN that we use it.

> - **Attestation preferences**: Whether the RP is interested in authenticator [attestation](#attestation), and if so, what form the attestation should take.

Reviewer: @wbamberg We don't - I was confusing with assertion as per https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/42338/files#r2660175485 - but either way I'd still consider this change.

> - **Attestation preferences**: Whether the RP is interested in authenticator [attestation](#attestation), and if so, what form the attestation should take.

Reviewer 2: +1 on defining attestation in the specific context. There are a lot of definitions, and it's good to specify them here.

> - **Authenticator preferences**: What [type of authenticator](#platform_and_roaming_authenticators) to use, whether the authenticator should perform [user verification](#user_verification) before creating the passkey.

Reviewer: Assuming this is a list of two this might be better.

```suggestion
- **Authenticator preferences**: What [type of authenticator](#platform_and_roaming_authenticators) to use, and whether the authenticator should perform [user verification](#user_verification) before creating the passkey.
```

- **Challenge**: The [challenge](#challenges) generated by the RP's server.

- **Website information**: A human readable name and ID for the RP that will be associated with the new passkey. The ID determines the [scope](#passkey_scope) of the resulting passkey.

- **User information**: Information about the user that will be associated with the new passkey, including a human-readable display name, an account identifier, and a human-readable account identifier such as an email address or username.

> Depending on the authenticator capabilities and the preferences of the RP, the authenticator may ask the user to authorize passkey creation via some [user verification](#user_verification) method: for example, using a {{glossary("biometric")}} such as a fingerprint.

Reviewer: I'm getting a redlink on biometric

Author: yes, this isn't written yet. I should at least file an issue for it though.

> The authenticator then creates a passkey for the account. It stores the private key locally and returns an object containing the public key, challenge, and some additional information. If the authenticator is performing attestation, then this is all {{glossary("digital signature", "digitally signed")}} with either the private key or an [attestation](#attestation) key belonging to the authenticator.

Reviewer: I started this review by reading passwords topic, which explains that you store a hash to avoid the password leaking via Database attack. I guess with passkeys you store a public key on the site, so there is nothing to leak that isn't public anyway.  In fact that is pretty much true of all the attacks since your device/manager holds the stuff you want to protect.

Or to put it another way, later on I'm hoping for a section on attacks that perhaps explains why passkeys are more resistant to many attacks.

Reviewer: Ah "ish" https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/42338/files#r2650138701

- **Challenge**: The [challenge](#challenges) generated by the RP's server.

- **Website ID**: The ID of the RP which is trying to sign the user in. See [Passkey scope](#passkey_scope).

- **User verification**: Whether the authenticator should perform [user verification](#user_verification) before using the passkey.

Next, the browser finds passkeys matching the given criteria: if it finds more than one, it may ask the user to choose one. The authenticator which stores this passkey will typically ask the user to authorize the use of this passkey, including [user verification](#user_verification) if this is requested by the RP and supported by the authenticator.

The authenticator will then use the passkey's private key to create a digitally signed [assertion](#assertions), including the challenge and other data.

The RP's front-end sends the assertion to the server, which verifies the signature using the public key it stored. If verification is successful, then the user can be signed in.

## Features of WebAuthn

In this section we'll go into some more detail about various aspects of the WebAuthn API.

### Platform and roaming authenticators

> The WebAuthn API distinguishes two types of authenticator:

Reviewer: If we strongly suggest credential managers, should we talk about where they fit into this categorization?

Reviewer: I guess I'm still hanging onto the idea that people know what a credential manager is, but they don't necessarily grok what an authenticator is. Which is why I keep trying to use the comfortable terminology. 

Fine not to add it though, you have just defined what they do.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The WebAuthn API distinguishes two types of authenticators:
```

- **Roaming authenticators**
  - : These authenticators can be removed from the device and attached to a different device. The classic example of this is an authenticator implemented in a USB key, like a [YubiKey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YubiKey).

When an RP creates a new passkey it can ask which type of authenticator it wants to use, as part of the [`authenticatorSelection`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#authenticatorselection) option that it passes to {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}}.

The main advantage of a platform authenticator is that it's convenient for the user: they don't have to keep track of a separate piece of hardware. The main disadvantage is that it can only be used with its host device.

Platform authenticators can sometimes function as roaming authenticators: for example, a platform authenticator on a mobile device might be available to a laptop as a roaming authenticator, via a Bluetooth connection.

> Although platform authenticators can't be removed from their device, they might be able to share their passkeys with other authenticators via cloud sync or import/export functions. For example, a platform provider might enable users to share their passkeys across all the devices belonging to their product family.

Reviewer: Just because it is so common, maybe

```suggestion
Although platform authenticators can't be removed from their device, they can often share their passkeys with other authenticators via cloud sync or import/export functions. For example, a platform provider might enable users to share their passkeys across all the devices belonging to their product family.
```

### Discoverable and non-discoverable credentials

The WebAuthn specification distinguishes between _discoverable_ and _non-discoverable_ credentials.

- Discoverable credentials are those that can be used without the RP first needing to identify the user who is being authenticated: that is, the "allowed credentials" array passed into {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.get()")}} can be empty.

- Non-discoverable credentials are those for which the RP must first identify the user who is being authenticated (for example, by having them enter their username), and then pass the associated credential ID into {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.get()")}}, in the "allowed credentials" array.

To create a discoverable credential, the RP should set the `residentKey` option to `"required"` and the `requireResidentKey` option to `true` when it creates a new credential in the {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}} call.

> _Passkeys must always be discoverable credentials, so RPs implementing passkey-based authentication should always set these options_.

Author: We could perhaps say here that one advantage of discoverable (aka resident) keys is that they can be used with techniques like autofill UI (explained further on in the doc) and that's why passkeys must be discoverable).

Author: > "so why both options, and which is better"? Which should I use?

Yeah, it's a weird bit of the spec. Basically, for passkeys, you have no choice, they are by definition resident AKA discoverable. So none of this is really actionable. But I think it is still worth explaining what the concept is, otherwise it is very mysterious.

It took me a while to understand exactly why non-resident keys are a thing, it isn't well explained. https://fy.blackhats.net.au/blog/2023-02-02-how-hype-will-turn-your-security-key-into-junk/ is interesting here.

Author: I agree that this section is a bit weird, but I think it is worth keeping. The reason I went into this detail is that I read [MDN on discoverable credentials](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Authentication_API#discoverable_credentials_and_conditional_mediation) and found it incredibly confusing. It goes on about how you have to make your keys discoverable, and why this is good, and how you do it, but never explains why some keys are not discoverable, or, critically, what the point is in having any non-discoverable keys.

So as a reader you think, well, why even have non-discoverable keys? Why is there this flag I have to set, to enable this "better key"? Why aren't they all better?

But actually non-discoverable, aka non-resident, keys are a very neat idea, because you can store (many) more keys in a relatively small USB device.

I don't want to combine "autofill UI" into this section, because this section is background explanation, and autofill is more of a how-to (part of how to manage a userbase who have a mixture of passwords and passkeys).

But I think I should _mention_ autofill UI here, and basically say:

- non-resident keys have this space-saving advantage over resident keys, and that's why they are supported in the WebAuthn spec
- but you can't do autofill UI with them
- and for this reason (and maybe some others), passkeys always have to be resident

Reviewer: This may well work. It certainly gives the section more context and I think it is worth trying.

As I said though, I don't know the "optimal" way to fix this without trying some alternatives. One other idea that popped up reading ^^^ was to rename the resident/non resident section "Why aren't passkeys non-discoverable keys".
That would allow you to explain all of this more naturally.

Not all authenticators support attestation, and RPs can indicate that they are not interested in attestation. In these situations, the object returned by a call to {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}} may not be signed at all, or it may be signed using the passkey itself (this is referred to as _self attestation_). In these situations, the RP has no reliable evidence of the authenticator's origin or capabilities.

### User verification

When a website calls {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}} to create a new passkey, or calls {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.get()")}} to create an assertion, the authenticator will always ask the user to consent to the operation.

The RP can also ask the authenticator to perform _user verification_, which means the user will be asked to authorize the use of their credential, for example by entering a PIN or a biometric such as a fingerprint.

When this happens, it's considered to be a form of {{glossary("multi-factor authentication")}}: the authenticator itself is "something the user has" while the PIN or biometric are respectively "something they know" or "something they are".

> Note that not all authenticators support user verification.

Author: I believe (although I'm not sure) that passkeys should always require user verification, and if so, we should say this here.

Author: I'm going to let this issue sit until we get a confirmation one way or another. FWIW I'm OK to merge this PR without resolving the issue, but I don't want us to guess.

The scope of a passkey determines which sites will be allowed to use the passkey.

By default:

- When a page creates a passkey by calling {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}}, the browser sets the passkey's _RP ID_ to the domain component of the caller's {{glossary("origin")}}, and the authenticator stores this value alongside the passkey.

- When a page uses a passkey by calling {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.get()")}}, the browser passes the domain component of the caller's {{glossary("origin")}} to the authenticator, and the authenticator will only allow the passkey to be used if this value matches the stored RP ID.

This means that by default, a passkey can only be used by a page from the same origin (excluding the port) as the page that originally created it.

Websites are allowed to relax these rules, within some constraints.

- When a website creates a passkey, it can pass an ID into {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}}, and the authenticator will use this as the RP ID.

- Similarly, when a website tries to use a passkey, it can pass an ID into {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.get()")}}, and the authenticator will compare this ID with the stored RP ID.

> For both `create()` and `get()`, the passed value must be a {{glossary("registrable domain")}} that is a _domain suffix_ of the domain of the caller's origin.

Reviewer: Redlink on the glossary

Author: yes, also not written yet. Most of the relevant content is in the entry for "site", but IMO it should be split out of there.

With the scope rules for passkeys, though, a site served from `https://examp1e.com` is not able to use passkeys that were created for `https://example.com`.

### Origin verification

The signed [assertion](#assertions) returned by an authenticator includes information about the context of the caller:

- The {{glossary("origin")}} of the document that called {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.get()")}}.
- If the caller was embedded as an {{htmlelement("iframe")}}, whether the caller had the same origin as the top-level document.
- The origin of the top-level document, if the caller was embedded as an {{htmlelement("iframe")}} and was not same-origin with the caller.

When the RP server verifies the assertion, it must check that these values are what it expects to see.

This provides a layer of protection against [phishing](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/Phishing) attacks, in addition to that provided by [passkey scope](#passkey_scope).

> ## Security properties of passkeys

Reviewer: Ah, I guess this is the answer to my questions about "why are passkeys so great, comparatively". 

Great. YOu might cover this more exhaustively, including things like size outside of their control and resistance to password lists etc - all the stuff in the passwords that counts as attacks.

Author: -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/42338/commits/126c5d62ecf258a6d0bbb1cf1debb57b5b355031 

I didn't move it to the end because I think it makes the flow weird:

1. here's what passkeys are
2. here's how to migrate from passwords
3. here's why passkeys are better

versus:

1. here's what passkeys are
2. here's why passkeys are better
3. here's how to migrate from passwords

> We can note some features of this design that make it inherently more secure than passwords:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Passkeys are inherently more secure than passwords:
```

In reality, most websites that add passkey support will already support password-based authentication, and will have an existing base of users with passwords. These users are not safe from the [weaknesses of passwords](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Authentication/Passwords#weaknesses_of_password-based_authentication) until they not only have and use passkeys on your site, but no longer even possess passwords associated with their accounts.

You can implement a three-step process to migrating users from passwords:

- [Enabling users to create passkeys alongside their passwords](#creating_passkeys_alongside_passwords)
- [Enabling users to use their passkeys, instead of their passwords](#using_passkeys_alongside_passwords)
- [Enabling users to delete their passwords](#retiring_passwords)

### Creating passkeys alongside passwords

The first step here is to offer users the opportunity to create a passkey when they successfully sign into your site with a password.

#### Conditional create

An additional step is a feature called _conditional create_. This allows an RP to create a new passkey for a user's account without requiring any user interaction, when certain conditions are met.

> To enable conditional create, the RP calls {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}}, passing the [`mediation`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CredentialsContainer/create#mediation) option set to `"conditional"`:

Author: This link doesn't work, yet. See https://github.com/mdn/content/issues/42516.

---
title: Passkeys
slug: Web/Security/Authentication/Passkeys
page-type: guide
sidebar: security
---

Passkeys enable websites to authenticate users without the user having to enter any passwords or other secret codes on the site itself. They're considered [the most secure authentication method available to websites](#security_properties_of_passkeys), and we recommend that sites should adopt passkeys as their preferred authentication method, and [phase out the use of passwords](#migrating_from_passwords).

> Instead of a shared secret, passkeys depend on public key cryptography. A passkey is a {{glossary("Public-key cryptography", "public/private key pair")}} that's specific to a particular user's account on a particular website.

Author: ```suggestion
Instead of a shared secret, passkeys rely on public-key cryptography. A passkey is a {{glossary("Public-key cryptography", "public/private key pair")}} bound to a specific user's account on a particular website.
```

> The private key is stored in a module called an _authenticator_, that's [in, or attached to, the user's device](#platform_and_roaming_authenticators). An authenticator might be built into the platform, like the [Touch ID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Touch_ID) system in Apple devices, or a separate hardware key like a [YubiKey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YubiKey), or a credential manager app like [KeePassXC](https://keepassxc.org/).

Author: I guess the reasoning behind this edit is that Touch ID isn't an authenticator (in itself)? Which is fair. But this edit  implies that platform authenticators always use biometrics (and by implication, roaming authenticators do not) which is misleading. I think I'd prefer to remove the Apple example:

```suggestion
The private key is stored in a module called an _authenticator_, that's [in, or attached to, the user's device](#platform_and_roaming_authenticators). An authenticator might be built into the platform, or a separate hardware key like a [YubiKey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YubiKey), or a credential manager app like [KeePassXC](https://keepassxc.org/).
```

## Features of WebAuthn

In this section we'll go into some more detail about various aspects of the WebAuthn API.

### Platform and roaming authenticators

The WebAuthn API distinguishes two types of authenticator:

- **Platform authenticators**
  - : These authenticators are not removable from the device. For example, authenticators built into the device's operating system, like the [Touch ID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Touch_ID) system in Apple devices or the [Windows Hello](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_10#System_security) system.
- **Roaming authenticators**
  - : These authenticators can be removed from the device and attached to a different device. The classic example of this is an authenticator implemented in a USB key, like a [YubiKey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YubiKey).

When an RP creates a new passkey it can ask which type of authenticator it wants to use, as part of the [`authenticatorSelection`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#authenticatorselection) option that it passes to {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.create()")}}.

> The main advantage of a platform authenticator is that it's convenient for the user: they don't have to keep track of a separate piece of hardware. The main disadvantage is that it can only be used with its host device.

Reviewer: Indeed. Another main benefit, is the fact that you're not limited to the number of resident keys. Perhaps not worth saying, but if so, maybe as a problem with many dedicated-hardware oaming authenticators and passkeys.

Platform authenticators can sometimes function as roaming authenticators: for example, a platform authenticator on a mobile device might be available to a laptop as a roaming authenticator, via a Bluetooth connection.

Although platform authenticators can't be removed from their device, they can often share their passkeys with other authenticators via cloud sync or import/export functions. For example, a platform provider might enable users to share their passkeys across all the devices belonging to their product family.

### Discoverable and non-discoverable credentials

> The WebAuthn specification distinguishes between _discoverable_ and _non-discoverable_ credentials.

Author: I don't think this change really adds anything.

The RP's front-end code passes the challenge into the `create()` or `get()` call, and the browser includes the same value in the object returned by these methods. In the case of `get()`, the challenge value is also part of the input to the digital signature calculated by the authenticator.

When the web server verifies the response from the authenticator, the web server needs to check that the challenge is the same value it originally provided.

The web server should also invalidate the challenge value after about 10 minutes, and reject any responses containing the challenge that have arrived after this time.

The challenge represents evidence that the authenticator's response was a response to _this_ request, and not an old response to some previous request that an attacker has managed to steal. This kind of attack is known as a {{glossary("replay attack")}}.

> ### Attestation

Reviewer: So as per my other comment, here we are talking abou Authenticator attestation and not "the authenticator sending back an attestation". Perhaps 

```suggestion
### Autenticator attestation
```

and corresponding link fixes.

The security of a passkey depends on the reliability of the authenticator used. For example, if an authenticator does not protect the private keys it stores, then an attacker could steal the keys and impersonate users. In _attestation_, an authenticator provides verifiable evidence to the RP about its origin, and about the data it produces (such as key pairs or signed assertions). This can help the RP decide whether it wants to rely on the authenticator to authenticate its users.

> To implement attestation, the authenticator contains a key pair called an _attestation key_, which was built into the device at manufacturing time, and which is {{glossary("digital certificate", "certified")}} as belonging to the organization that made this authenticator. For example, the certificate could state that this authenticator was produced by "Acme Authenticator Incorporated".

Author: This edit doesn't quite make sense, it will read:

> the authenticator may use a key pair called an _attestation key_, which was built into the device at manufacturing time, a certified belonging to the authenticator manufacturer.

Is it intended as:

> the authenticator may use a key pair called an _attestation key_, which was built into the device at manufacturing time, and a digital certificate belonging to the authenticator manufacturer.

? But if so I am not sure it is an improvement, since (a) istm that the certificate isn't necessarily in the authenticator, and (b) it doesn't capture what istm is the important bit, that the attestation signing key is _certified as_ belonging to the manufacturer.  That is, the edit says there is a key and a certificate, but doesn't link them.

> When the authenticator creates a new passkey, it signs the resulting object with its attestation key. The RP verifies the signature and the associated certificate, and then has evidence that the passkey was made by an authenticator produced by "Acme Authenticator Incorporated".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the authenticator creates a new passkey, it may include an attestation statement signed with its attestation key. The RP can verify the signature and the associated certificate, and then has evidence that the passkey was made by an authenticator produced by "Acme Authenticator Incorporated".
```

To reduce the chance of problems like this, the WebAuthn API defines a set of static methods of {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential")}} that enable an RP to tell authenticators about server-side changes:

- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential()")}} tells the browser that a specific passkey was not recognized by the RP, and is typically called by the RP immediately after the user tried to sign in with this passkey. The most common scenario here is that the user deleted this passkey on the server, and then mistakenly tried to sign in with it.

- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials()")}} gives the browser the identifiers of all the passkeys that the RP currently accepts as valid, to enable all attached authenticators to update their stored keys. It could be called every time the user successfully authenticates. This API must only be called for authenticated users, because it exposes the user's credential IDs.

> - {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails()")}} tells the browser the user's current username and display name, and should be called when an authenticated user changes these values. This API must only be called for authenticated users, because it exposes uses data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails()")}} tells the browser the user's current username and display name, and should be called when an authenticated user changes these values. This API must only be called for authenticated users, because it exposes user data.
```
